Mist is past the northwest
cave.

The king arrested Cid
for treason.

Cecil,please avenge the
king!

I still can't believe our
king has his knights train
as dark swordsmen!

The king's decrees have
become outlandish…

I hear a tunnel's being
dug inside a beach cave.

I have a bad feeling about
your mission…

A monk was invited to lead
the guards.
They're at the inn.

The king left no heirs…

Wow,a dark knight! Scary!!
…But kinda cool,too.

I miss that dark knight.
I kinda liked him.

So you're that dark
knight?! I knew you were
OK!

The western building leads
to the Ancient Waterway.

This is the first time in
Baron's history that we
have no king.

Wh-Why hello,sir! No,I've
said nothing bad about the
king.Come,watch me dance!

The king doesn't let me
dance anymore.
…Are you sad?

You look tons better as a
paladin! Dance with me!

Welcome!
This is the Training Room.
We've been expecting you.

Women,children,expert
callers…all lost in that
tragic fire.
($09)This may be the end of the
callers of Mist.

I hear the soul of an
Esper sleeps under Baron.

D

The Espers we call appear
from another plane,deep
underground.

Turn…back…NOW!!

This is Kaipo,
Oasis of the Desert.

Somebody found a sick lady
from Baron.She has desert
fever.

The Underground Waterway
is north of here,but eight
huge sea snakes block the
path to Damcyan.

I wanna go to Damcyan,but
some kook's not letting
anyone pass.
…Wanna see my dance?

Anna fell in love with
a bard,but Sage Tellah
didn't approve…so she ran
away.

We're in the domain of
Damcyan Kingdom.Its prince
has the voice of an angel!

I've heard strange noises
near the mountains
southeast of here…

You!!
…This is for my son!
($09)($09)[Black]Toad!

YOU wanna be a paladin?
What a joke!

D

Well,you proved me wrong…

You can never imagine how
we've suffered for what
you did to us.

Don't forget,Mt.Ordeals is
to the east.
Palom,Porom,be careful…

I sense you're also in
great pain…
I'll pray for you,too.

Get out!!

Mt.Ordeals is full of
undead.Your dark sword
will be useless.

You became a paladin!

It's a sad thing that men
should hurt men.

Endure this trial and
cleanse the darkness
within.

Always remember the code
of the paladin.

How can you have the gall
to come here?!

None have ever faced the
trials of Mt.Ordeals and
returned to tell the tale.

This doesn't mean I've
forgiven you!

Eek!
($09)($09)($09)You're the…
($09)($09)($09)Dark Knight of Baron!

Eek!
($09)($09)($09)You're gonna be a paladin?
($09)($09)($09)You can't fool me!

Eek!
($09)($09)($09)You're a paladin?
($09)($09)($09)What a surprise!

D

This is the Devil Road
leading to Baron.It's
sealed now,to prevent
any further raids.

The Devil Road was named
as such because it saps
the stamina of its
travelers.

Yikes! You guys giants?!

Hey,human!
Don't step on us,OK?

How much antsteak would it
take to fill YOUR belly?

We mine mythril.
Toads refine it,minimen
process it,and pigs sell
it.

The mythril mine is far
north,but not a long walk
for your long legs!

Hey!

D

We'll show you a great
dance!
($09)($09)Come on,broskis!

We're the Mythril Bros!
($09)($09)($09)Everybody dance now!

Thank you!

Care for a dip?

Welcome to Troia,City of
Nature.

You can't swim with armor
on,it'll rust.

H-Huh?!
Get your own spot…!

Have you seen my husband?

The hottest buzz is about
[Harp]Whisperweed.A pair can
transmit sound to one
another! 

…
($09)($09)($09)Do you mind? I'm tanning.

Metals get too heavy to
carry in Lodestone Cavern,
on the northeast isle.

This is Agart,home of the
dwarves' descendants.

Our legend states there
are two sides to every
coin.This world is no
exception…

My dwarven heritage is why
I'm so short.I wish I was
related to ogres.

I wonder how our ancestors
got here.

We can't live without the
sun,but not our ancestors…

I'm strong! But my great-
great grandpa was
much,much stronger.

D

An ancient well is
enshrined here.It's said
to be bottomless.





The weather is so much
nicer here than in Mist…
Oh,feel free to browse!



Why's your armor dark?
Are you a bad guy?

Daddy says it's the
soldiers' fault we get few
customers.

          WANTED
      Cute dancers!
    Inquire at counter.
       -Baron Inn

Welcome,Sir Cecil! Gil?
I couldn't charge one of
the king's dark knights!

I heard Cid's locked up
for hiding his latest
airship.

Drinks are on me,sir!

Sir Cecil! W-We've been
paying all our taxes.

These soldiers are so
vulgar…

The city's lively again!
Gotta work hard…

Wow,mister,you look regal!

D

Yang:A word,sir.
I deeply apologize for my
behavior.The guards will
no longer be a bother.
Owner:Hey,you're not the
worst guest we've had.
Thanks for the help!
Stay a night on us.

Where's my drink?!



Cid:Zzz…
New engine's done…
Zzz…

Hilda:Another all-nighter…
It worries me when he
stays too late at the
castle.
People say the king is up
to awful schemes.

     Buoyancy and its
        Principles

 History of Shipbuilding

    Birds of the World

Hilda:Cecil?!
You're alive! Listen,Dad
was arrested! Please, save
him - he HAS to be OK!!

Hilda:Take care,Dad!
Make sure he doesn't get
into trouble,guys.

Hilda:Dad's spent an awful
long time away…

Zzz…

Joanna:His Majesty has
become dreadful…I heard
you did an awful thing in
Mysidia.
Don't drag Rosa into
trouble,I beg you.

Joanna:Rosa went after
you! Where is she?!

Joanna:Rosa! Are you
alright?!
Rosa:Yes.I'm sorry for
running off like that.
Joanna:I never should've
let you become a white
wizard…
Rosa:Mother! You did the
same for Father!
Joanna:…You're right.I did
aid that famous dragoon
with my healing.
OK,dear.But please,look
after yourself!

Cecil:You…you are…?!
($09)($09)($09)…Rydia should be here.



D

D

D

D

Sage Tellah raised Anna by
himself,and still she ran
off…

I'm on my way to Fabul,but
a curious old man denies
access to the Waterway.

Welcome!
We have few customers
these days,due to the
monsters.

      Have a mug of
     Kaipo's Finest!

Only Damcyan royalty may
enter the Antlion Cave,
east of the castle.

We found this Baron woman
outside town.
She keeps calling for
'Cecil.'

So you're Cecil.Take good
care of Rosa!

A [Crystal]Sand Ruby could cure
her fever,but they're in
the antlion's nest…

The only cure for desert
fever is the light of a
[Crystal]Sand Ruby.

Rosa:…Cecil…[Song]($13)
…Don't go…!

Glad you're well again.
Drop by if you're ever in
Kaipo.

Come to take even our
drinks,dark knight?!

YOU'RE going to Mt.
Ordeals?! Fruitless,I tell
you!

     Never forgive or
   forget Baron's raid.

You…you're really…!

Bring my beloved back!!

Palom,Porom.Be vigilant
around this man.

How dazzling…
So this is a paladin.

G-Get back! I'm n-not
scared of you,dark knight!

You,a paladin? Surely you
jest!

…Or maybe you don't jest.

Here,have a drink on me.

If you become a paladin,
anyone can! Bah!

You really did it!

P-P-Please forgive me!
I've done nothing!

P-P-Plea…huh?
You'll climb Mt.Ordeals?

You look so noble!

Cecil:Ugh!

Sorry,did the poison make
it bitter?!

Received…
[Shield]Seraphic Shield!
[Hammer]Artemis Arrows!
[Hammer]Perseus Arrows!



D

D

Water,Fire,Earth,and Wind:
    The Four Elements

 Black Magic Encyclopedia

  My First Healing Spell

D

D

Elder forgives all you've
done,but I can't…

Become a paladin and
you'll have my trust.

Go in peace.

This is the Tower of
Prayers.

Go and see if the light
accepts you.

Your light was so dim,but
now it's radiant!

How do humans become evil?
All start as an innocent
babe…

Paladins are the light
warriors - a dark knight's
opposite.

You did it!
It must be fate…

Girl:You called for us?
Elder:Where's Palom?
Girl:Palom! Get out here!

Boy:So you're that Baron
dude,huh? Be grateful I'm
gonna help you!

Porom:How do you do,Sir
Cecil?

Porom:Palom!
You must greet him!

Palom:'Sup,dude!

Black Mage Palom and
White Mage Porom joined! 
[Song][Claw]($05)[Float]

Elder:Go to Mt.Ordeals!
Palom,Porom,you know
your task. 

Elder:Our fate is in your
hands.I can only pray for
you now.
($09)Palom,Porom,behave
yourselves and help
Cecil.

Elder:So Palom and Porom
have fulfilled their
fates…

Elder has been praying
every day for you.

We pray,too…for all who
live.

Elder:Tellah,as well…
I warned him not to fight
with hate.

We're praying!

Hurry to the Moon!

Elder:The Lunar Whale is
the Ark of the Moon.It's
a giant airship,but you
can touch its crystal to
travel between Earth and
the Moon.

This city is paradise…

Mmm…what tasty morsels!

She's charging you HOW
much for a Member's Pass?!
That's insane!
($09)Next thing you know,she'll
start asking for edible
silver…

Darling,you drive me wild!
…Wait,do you even work
here?

Our country's forest is
quite vast.I wonder what's
hidden deep in the woods…?

Member's Pass,please.

That looks tasty and
expensive! Here,take a
pass free of charge.Just
keep this under your hat…
Received Member's Pass!

The chicks here're
amazin'!

Y'all come back again now!

I want a mink coat…

Pardon me,do you even have
the Gil to be here?
This section is reserved:
opulence only.

He keeps telling the same
boring story…

…That's when I dealt a
mighty blow to the imp!

D

Blast that geezer! He's
got my sweet Jenny…!

D

Anything for you!

More food coming!

Eek!
This is the dressing room!

D

The grand show is about to
begin…

Fantastic!!



Thanks to our rich soil,we
have lots of fresh veggies
for our birdy pals.

D

    All Those Chocobos

      Chocobreeding

The wild ones in the
Chocobo Village up north
can still fly a bit.

The flying chocobos only
land in woods.

          Scoop:
      Black Chocobos!
      -Troia Tribune

Wark!

D

They're sooo cute!
…But a bit stinky.

D

D

D

D

D

I wanna fly on a black
chocobo! But Mom says
these ones can't.

Welcome to the
Observatory,home of the
only telescope.
($09)We're busy researching the
Red Moon.

Once Kory starts studying,
he often forgets to eat…

    The Dream of Stars

      Constellations

   The Moon and Humans

I'm Professor Kory.
I research our two moons
from this tower.
($09)One's an empty satellite,
but the other holds life,
and is turning…well,blood
red.
I hope this isn't a bad
sign…

Something red went under
the north mountains.

It's pretty peaceful but
for the occasional quake.

Granny's the oldest person
in the village.Wanna know
something? Ask her!

Our ancestors came from a
crater in the north
mountains,but nothing's
there now.
Besides,you'd need to fly
to get there.

When the sun's stone
returns to the altar,the
way to the Homeland will
reopen.

Darkness and light,
They come as a pair.
Morning and night,
Combined fill the air.
…An ancient poem of our
people!

Watch the dance of the
Homeland!

Our ancestors came from
the Homeland.Instead of
a sun,they have seas of
magma.

Wark! Dash on the world
map by pressing Y![Song][Knife]

Watch out,that's no
chocobo!!

That vulture must've been
preying on these poor
chocobos…





All's well.

A monster was disguised as
the king?!

I feel something dark
about the castle lately…

We may have also been
under the influence of
monsters.

You leave at the crack of
dawn.Get a good sleep.

You're not to return 'til
your mission is done.

Who are you?

It's late…best to stay in,
sir.

I hear that Espers can
change their shape.

You look familiar…

This tower's off-limits.

Cid:Cecil!

D

Have you seen Cid?

Chief! Cecil!

I'm sure Chief's doing
fine!

Finally,a bit of sleep…
($09)($09)($09)Uh,I'm kidding!
Cecil,please don't tell
Chief!

Great,now I'm seeing
things…
($09)($09)…Wait,Chief?!
Uh,yeah,I'm working hard,
sir!

I think we're finally
nearing Chief's level!
($09)($09)But don't tell him.

Prince Edward…

…

Sir Yang!
Welcome back.

It's dangerous out there.
Rest for now.

Don't worry,we'll keep
the castle safe.

Hello,Sir Cecil!

D

Welcome to Troia Castle.

-ribbit-

Please feel at home.

North cave…shiny in water!

The clerics know the most
about the Crystal.

D

The clerics govern our
country.Be polite!





Take the chests in this
room.The switch is on the
wall.

I hear a voice from the
cellar…

Heard you brought back the
Crystal!

None of Golbez's soldiers
were human.

…?!
($09)($09)($09)I-I wasn't asleep!

…His Majesty…

Kain:Are you ready?
Cecil:I'll be counting on
you.
($09)Kain:Then you've nothing
to fear.

Cecil!

Palom:Smells like a
monster…
Porom:An unmistakable
scent!

Baigan:Wh-Where?!

Palom:You can't be so
trusting,dude…

The king seems off lately…

Please,Cecil,take the
throne!

D

What'll we do without the
Red Wings…?

I have faith in the king.

Please avenge His Majesty.

Mist Cave is to the
northwest.

We dragoons shall defend
Baron.

Sir Cecil and Sir Kain
make the ultimate team!

I'm ashamed…

Don't go slandering the
king behind his back,or
you'll wind up in jail.

We will always keep guard.

Kain:What's wrong?
Can't sleep?

Cid:…See,just fiddle
with the mechanism here…

I suggest you stray from
treasonous thoughts.

I knew something was wrong
with the king,but didn't
want to be executed…

King:Cecil! You're back.
But you're a paladin…
That won't do at all.
Cecil:…Your Majesty?

You impostor!

Cid:You're gonna pay
for stickin' me in that
stinkin' joint!
…Huh?

Cecil:Hey Cid!
Cid:Where's Rosa? She
ran after ya!
Cecil:Golbez took her…
Cid:Dang Golbez!
First my airships,now my
Rosa!

Tellah:Enough jabber!
Take us to your airship.

Cid:Who's this,the
elder crab?
Tellah:Elder?! You old
windbag!
Cid:YOUNG windbag,
thanks!

Porom:Please desist! Mr.
Cid,this is Sage
Tellah.

He's Yang,the high monk
of Fabul.I'm Porom,a
white mage of Mysidia.

…Oh,and he's Palom,my
twin brother.
Palom:Hey…!

Yang:An honor to meet
you,Cid.
Cid:Well! You sure are
a mannerly fella.

Cecil:So where's the
latest ship?

We'll be sure that never
happens again.

Cid:Where nobody'd
suspect,of course…

Tellah:Well,hurry up!

Cid:Shut it and follow!

King?:Indeed!
I am the Water Fiend,
Cagnazzo!

Received [Ring]Signet.



D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

This is Baron's treasury.
None may enter.

…

The party's black mages
learned [Black]Bio!

Rydia learned [Call]Witch!

We've confined the
survivors.

Hope we don't have to use
this jail anymore…

Blast you all!

Please return the Crystal
to Mysidia.

You don't understand!
The Crystal isn't some
bauble!

Can't believe I was
wounded…

Captain?!
I didn't recognize you!

Captain…

You're alive!!

Gonna drink and forget
what I did in Mysidia…

You're the only one who
can be our king!

That mission left a bad
taste in my mouth.

Golbez stole the Red
Wings!

The Red Wings have lost
their glimmer.

If only we had airships…



I've changed your linens.
Leaving early,sir?
Sleep well.

















…





…

They took…the Crystal…!

…

Pot of Life…above…

A beautiful harp…one of
Damcyan's treasures.

Tellah:Anna!!

Tellah:You're that bard!
You did this!!

Edward:The [Crystal]Sand Ruby is
made of the secretions
of the antlion when it
lays eggs.
The nest is across the
shoals.We can use my
hovercraft to cross them,
and also return to Kaipo.

You can go to Kaipo along
the shoals with the
hovercraft.

The road to Fabul through
Mt.Hobs is blocked by
thick ice…

D

Cecil:You can't go alone!

Tellah:I need no help.
This is my own affair!

Sage Tellah left.

Edward:A-Anna…
-sob-

Rydia:Stop it!

Rydia:You're a grownup!
I lost my mom,and I'm not
gonna cry anymore.
Cecil:Rydia…

Edward:I know,I'm just a
coward…but I don't care!
I'm staying here with
Anna!

D

Edward:…Your friend sounds
important.You shouldn't
lose her…

Go on ahead.

The watch tower is badly
damaged.It's not safe to
go up now.

Tellah:You love him that
much…?
Anna:I do…and I love you,
too,Father…
Oh,Edward…!











So,our main forces are
gone…

How dreadful…

There's a rumor among
the sailors about the
Lord of the Seas.

Welcome back!

Sir Yang!

You must be weary.Please
rest.

Going out to sea?
Be careful.There have been
many shipwrecks recently.

Good to see you again!

D

D

D

The king was wounded.
He's resting in his room.







I heard you were ambushed
at Mt.Hobs!
Are you OK,sir?

If we had an airship,we
might have won…

I-I'm meditating!

Good luck!

Back from your training,
Sir Yang?

What an attack…

We're safe in the castle.

It's good that our city
is walled.

Beat them up,Sir Yang!

HI-YAAAH!
($09)($09)($09)I wanna be a strong monk!

King:We need to take
action,but for now,rest.

D

King:If Golbez acquires
all the Crystals,the
world will face an 
unprecedented crisis!

These are the king's
quarters.

The king used to be the
high monk.
This is nothing to worry
about!

King:Go to the harbor to
the east when you're set.
The ship is ready.

Let's sleep in the king's
bed!

King:Act wisely.

Received [Dark Sword]Deathbringer!

King:Ah,Cecil! It's good
to see you again!
How fares Yang's
training?
When you can,bring him to
me.He and I must speak.



This is the infirmary.

Were only I as skilled as
Miss Rosa…

G-Golbez…!

They even have monsters
on their side…

Woman:Hi,honey!
Yang:This is my wife.
Sheila,this is Cecil.
He saved my life.
Sheila:My! Well,consider
yourselves at home with
us.

Sheila:So you kept him
safe! Thanks.
Yang:Not only me,but
Fabul as well.
Are you OK?
Sheila:Yep! A soldier came
up,but I whacked him with
my pan.

Sheila:Get going!

Sheila:Don't be silly,I
know my old lug's OK.

Sheila:-sniff-
…Darn onions always make
my eyes water.

Sheila:Wake my old lug up
with this.

Received Frying Pan!

Sheila:What?! Yang's in
the Underworld?

Sheila:Sorry 'bout makin'
you do all that.
Take this as thanks.

Received [Knife]Spoon!

Sheila:If you see him,tell
my honey to get better…
for me!



Tellah:Let's rest here.

Tellah:In this field,you
may use [Tent]Tents and also
record your journey.
($09)We should rest in my [Tent]Tent
tonight… 

I'm no dancer,I'm a guard!

Baron's up to something…

This isn't a leotard,it's
a combat uniform.

Yes,Troia is protected by
women alone.No need to
stare.Hmph,men…so easily
charmed.

Granny?! Hmph!
I am the chancellor!
The clerics are within.

A man from Damcyan was
found on the beach.
Says he's a prince.

D

Troia's never known war.
I'm not sure if we're
prepared for combat.

The eight clerics are
sisters and serve the
Earth Crystal.

The land will turn to
desert without the
Crystal!

We're far better off with
women as our rulers…
It's true!

As promised,you may borrow
the Earth Crystal.

Oh no! The Crystal…

The Dark Elf is weak to
metallic weapons,so he
encircled his cave in a
magnetic field.

Be careful with the
Crystal.

So the Earth Crystal has
fallen into the hands of
evil…

The Dark Elf is on an
island cave to the
northeast.

What was that?!

The Crystal was stolen?!
Get it back!

If you get back the
Crystal,bring it to us.
We'll lend it to you.

Please take the treasures
from the basement.
They should be used for
justice.

First the Dark Elf,now
Golbez…hmph!

Metal becomes impossibly
heavy in the Lodestone
Cavern - your gear will
also be affected.

We're only lending you the
Crystal!

The Crystals were kept
apart to avoid this very
situation…

If you reclaim the
Crystal,you may borrow it
for the right reasons.

…Goodness gracious…

The one who acquires all
the Crystals will obtain
fearsome power…

The Dark Elf took the
Earth Crystal.We must get
it back,but how…?

The Crystals raise the
power of their bearer.If
he's evil,the Crystal will
still submit to him.

If the rumor is true -
that there are more than
four Crystals - we may
still have a chance.

We,the eight clerics,rule
this country.We used to
have the blessing of the
Earth Crystal,but not now…

What in the world is
happening?!

It's not only us! 
The world is in a crisis!

That's it!

You retrieved the Earth
Crystal!

So you have the Crystal,
Cecil…

Cid:…Kain![Song]($16)
($09)($09)($09)Kain:Leave and board
your airship.
I'll take you to where
Rosa is.



Prince Edward shouldn't
move around.
…Huh? No,I'm the nurse.
She's the doctor.

He can't get out of bed
'til he's well.
Don't worry,he's in good
hands.

Edward:Cecil…
Save Rosa!

Please keep quiet!
We have a patient here.

Edward:Please avenge Anna
for my sake…

Edward:Tellah,too?!
Why does everyone I love
die…?

Edward:And now Yang…
I wish I could fight with
you.

Edward:So Yang is well!
Have you told Sheila?

Edward's harp.

Edward:My harp!

Received [Harp]Gilbert Harp!



This used to be a dungeon,
but now it's the clerics'
treasury.

That's a lie!

OK,go on in.

My,how honest!







Edge:That chest…

Edge:Here goes!















We're working on the use
of battle magic.

I'm embarrassed I couldn't
spot that fake king…

Some monsters are immune
to the basic spells of
[Black]Fire,[Black]Ice,and [Black]Bolt.
Must be more to learn… 

So [Black]Meteo was real!

[Black]Sleep!
($09)($09)($09)Sweet dreams…!
($09)($09)($09)Crud,you're not sleepy.

[Black]Piggy!
($09)($09)($09)Prepare to say oink…!

Crud,that was [White]Mini. 

Rosa became a white
wizard to help you,Cecil.

We can only pray the king
rests in peace…

I'm studying the three
Cs of white magic:
[White]Cure,[White]Cure2,and [White]Cure3!

I couldn't tell the king
wasn't real…

The king is energetic
lately,but something's
amiss…

We'll protect Baron with
our white magic.









Go back…!
($09)($09)($09)Cecil:Who's there?!

Leave now…!
($09)($09)($09)Kain:Is this the Esper
of Mist Cave?

Cecil:We must deliver
this [Ring]Signet to Mist
Village.
($09)Then I have no choice!
($09)($09)($09)Kain:Cecil!
The mist is coalescing!





Old Man:Past here lie
monsters far too strong
for you.Go back to Kaipo!







Ouch…the beast in the cave
beyond here is strong.
Use a [Tent]Tent if needed,
and save while you can.

Whoa…better not!



Tellah:Prepare yourselves!

Tellah:It's the Octomamm!

Tellah:Let's hurry to
Damcyan! It's past this
waterfall.[Song][Claw]($05)[Float]





Received [Crystal]Sand Ruby![Song][Claw]($05)[Float]



Edge:I got this.

Edge:Hang tight!

I will not waste my time
on you…





Thick ice forms an
impasse.

Rosa:Cast [Black]Fire,Rydia.
Rydia:… 

Rosa:Rydia…only you can
melt this ice.If we can't
get to Fabul,even more
people will be hurt.
Rydia:…
($09)($09)($09)Edward:Please,Rydia.Show
me your bravery again.
($09)($09)Rydia:…

Rydia:[Black]Fire! 

Rydia learned [Black]Fire!($05)[Float]

Edward:Wonderful!
Rydia:…
Rosa:Thank you so much!
($09)Cecil:Rydia…

Edward:Rydia…
Rosa:You can do it!

Edward:A monk!

Edward:It's a bomb!!
Rydia:Let's help!

Monk:Thank you.
I am Yang,the high monk
of Fabul.
($09)We were training when
they attacked…
Cecil:We are headed for
Fabul.
Rosa:Golbez is using
Baron to get Crystals.

Monk:HI-YAAAH!

Cecil:What's that?

Rosa:Golbez must have
sent those monsters to
distract you while they
assault Fabul!

Cecil:Then they'll arrive
at any minute!

Yang:This is our
problem.Thank you for the
warning,but -
($09)Cecil:That's where you're
wrong.
Edward:I'm the Prince of
Damcyan.
Rosa:Cecil and I were
citizens of Baron.
Cecil:And this girl was
one of the many victims
of our kingdom's recent
attacks…which I have
personally led.
Rydia:…

Yang:You have your own
reasons,I see.
Would you aid us?
Cecil:Of course.
Yang:Fabul is east of
the mountain.Let's go!

High Monk Yang joined!($05)[Float]

Received [Knife]Thief Knife!

Edward:…What was that?
($09)($09)($09)…
($09)($09)($09)…It seems he dropped
something,in his haste to
flee.[Song][Song]







A blaze forms an impasse.





-hiss…hiss…-
($09)($09)($09)Porom:Palom!
Palom:It's not me!

-hiss…hiss…-
($09)($09)($09)Porom:I told you to stop!
Palom:It isn't me!!

…

!!
($09)($09)($09)Look out!!





Hee-hee-hee…
($09)($09)($09)And so,I was defeated…but
my reach extends beyond
death.Why not come join me
in it?
Hee-ha-ha!

Tellah:The walls!

Cid:It's locked!
Tellah:This one,too!

Cecil:Palom,Porom?!

Palom:Thanks,dude.
Porom:It was almost like
we'd gained an older
brother.
Palom:We won't let it end
like this!
Porom:Sage Tellah,please
look after Sir Cecil!

Palom:Ready,Porom?
Porom:Yes!

Cecil:What are you
doing?!
($09)($09)Stop!!
($09)($09)($09)Palom and Porom:[Black]Break! 

Cecil:Palom…Porom!![Song][Rod]($05)[Float]

No effect,as the twins
became stone of their own
will.

Yang:Oh,children…

Cid:…We'll get back at
'em for ya!
To the Enterprise!!

Tellah:Stand aside…
($09)($09)($09)[White]Heal! 

His Majesty will not see
you.Finish your mission
first.

Tellah:…It should've been
an old man like me.

Cecil:Looks deep.

Cid:A magnetic field?!
Looks like metallic gear's
outta the question!
Yang:My claws seem fine.
Tellah:Never fear,we're
unstoppable with my
magic!







Received [Greatsword]Thunder!



GRRR…

RRRGGHH!!



Cecil:If I could draw my
sword…!

Cecil:Let's do this!

Sealed by the Dark Elf.

Dark Elf:You…YOU!!





This is the Devil Road.
It leads to Mysidia,but
they closed their side.

It's open again!

Sealed at Mysidia's end.













Golbez:Hah!

Golbez:Cagnazzo was
defeated…

Kain:About the last
Crystal…
Golbez:I know…it's a
problem.
Kain:How about we let
Cecil get it for us?
Golbez:Hmm…

Kain:We can exchange
Rosa for the last
Crystal.

Golbez:At last you've said
words of value.
Yes…we can do away with
him then.
Kain:I'll be the
messenger.

Rosa:Kain!

Kain:You're going to
finally see I'm a better
man than Cecil!

Cecil:If we were a second
late,Rosa would've…

[White]Exit!

Dad found a funny ore.He
said he'd exchange it for
tails.

No tail,no ore.Scram,pal.

Is that…the Rat Tail?!
OK,here! Take it! Take it
all!
($09)Received [Stone]Adamant![Song][Claw]($05)[Float]

Oh…my…WORD!
The…the legendary Pink
Tail!!
Here,you've earned this!
Received [Armor]Adamant![Song][Claw]($05)[Float]





Fusoya:Get near its mouth!
Cid:Who're you?!
Cecil:Fusoya of the
Moon.
Cid:You're kiddin' me.
Fusoya:Can you or not?
Cid:Ya got the best man
for the job!

Cid:Hang on!

Cid:I'm all patched up!







Cecil:I don't see an
entrance…
Edge:Watch this!

Edge:Ready?



Edge:A-ha!

Edge:Ready?

Out of power.

Watch out!
A Death Machine lurks
behind this door!

The Crystals…

Your Highness!









In battle,press X to skip
a turn.Press SELECT to
toggle the ATB gauge to a
percentage.

'Bane' eats HP to deal a
sure-fire critical hit.
($09)($09)Just don't use it with a
drain-type weapon,or
you'll keel over!

Some shields can even be
equipped by battlemages
and dual-wielders.

Need variety? White mages
can use [Wrench]hammers,and ninja
can use [Dark Sword]dark swords.
($09)Also,keep an eye out for
long-range weapons.They
deal full damage from the
back row!

Know what you're working
with! Press A,then X on a
spell or A,then A on
equipment to see details.

Getting clobbered?
Slow down the battle
speed.It'll make even the
toughest fights tolerable.

Ever find a [Potion]Megalixir?
Consider yourself lucky!
($09)($09)No one on this planet can
concoct a brew like it.
A visitor from beyond
must've left them here…
But that's just crazy
talk,yeah?

Aquatic foes are weak to
[Black]Bolt,and undead to [White]Cure
and [Black]Fire.But for fliers,
you'll need wind attacks.

…

Fables speak of forbidden
armaments known as the
Legendary Weapons.
($09)So powerful,they are,that
terrible beasts in the
land,sea,and heavens keep
vigil over them…
Ha! What baloney!

Have you heard of divine
magic? We only know of
one.It casts [White]Cure,and
gives [White]Protect and [White]Shell.
…But who could harness the
Might of the Gods?

…

Ancient manuscripts repeat
the word 'Ultima…'
But is it a weapon?
A beast? A spell?

Mechs are easily bested
with blunt weapons!
Also,all projectiles are
imbued with [Float]Wind. 

We have New Game+!
After seeing the True End
and the words 'THE END'
are shown,press START.









Edge:!

…Looks like he dropped
something again.[Song][Song]

Received [Black]Void Stone!









Greetings,Cecil.

We won't let you halt the
Giant.

I'm afraid you…

…Will be laid to rest
here!

Cecil:The Four Fiends!
($09)($09)($09)Milon:Lord Zemus breathed
new life into us.
Cagnazzo:All driven to
ensure your ruin!
Valvalis:And you will fall
here.
Rubicant:You taught me
there's power in numbers.
Now,I shall restore you!

Fight with all your might!

Milon:Lord Zemus!

Cagnazzo:We failed…!

Valvalis:No…!

Rubicant:Well fought,
warriors…

Rosa:We have no choice.

Curse you!!

Fusoya:Wait!

Kain:Save it! We must
hurry!

Cecil:We did it!
Edge:It stopped!

Golbez:Goodbye,Cecil.

Rosa:Kain!
Edge:You can't trick us
anymore!











Cid:Get the lead out,
Enterprise!

Cecil:What?!

Cecil:Kain!

Kain:We meet again.

Cid:What's your angle,
Kain?!

Cecil:Where's Rosa?
Kain:If you want her
back,get us the Earth
Crystal.
Cecil:…Troia's Crystal.

Tellah:Dirty slime!
Kain:We'll exchange the
Crystal for Rosa's safe
return.
Yang:You…!

Cecil:Wake up,Kain!

Kain:Farewell.





Edge understood the
power of his heritage.

Received…
[Boomerang]Wing Edge!
[Shuriken]Ninja Star x5!

Edge needs to be here.

Whew!
You're not monsters!

We're hiding here.

This tunnel leads to the
Tower of Babil -
Rubicant's headquarters.

We lost our kingdom…
This is our home now.

The robot at the entrance
looks ancient.I wouldn't
mess with it…

The prince went to scout
the tunnel.He's been gone
a long time…

D

Food is running short…

The prince is a great
ninja!

We'll endure here 'til
the prince returns.

The prince went on alone…

…Prince has…a hot temper…

He's…after Rubicant…

Stop the…prince…

Edge:W-Wait…!

Rosa:[White]Cure!







The prince might be able
to win this.

The king and queen were
taken while the prince was
gone.

Mom's carrying my little
sister.I've gotta protect
them!

I can't believe we ninja
were defeated so easily…

This may be the end of the
ninja of Eblan…

The prince and his crew
dug a tunnel to the Tower
of Babil to rescue the
king and queen…
But no one's seen them
lately.

Hang in there,hon.

There're monsters
everywhere!

Oh,sweetie…

The prince'll beat up the
bad guys,yeah?

We'll hold out here.
Please be careful.


Wark! [Knife]Thief Knife lets
you steal from enemies,
but it won't work on a
boss![Song][Number]

Cid:A ship's comin'!

Yang:A white flag…
Tellah:They come in
peace…?

Yang:Cecil…
Cid:Kain…!

Wark!

Wark! Fill up your
bestiary by using Scan
on your foes![Song][Knife]

The end has a way of
closing in.Don't resist -
escape is impossible.
($09)Sit helpless…
and fascinate in horror…
at my approach!

Wark! Different vehicles
can cross different
terrain.[Song][Knife]











Luca:Rise!

Elder!

They're in trouble!

Elder:I know.

Please be safe!

Giott:For Mother Earth!

You're our last hope!

Sir Cecil…







Wark!















D

D

D

D

D

D

D

Don't touch! This armor is
sacred.

If you come back,you'll be
able to use these.
…Pfft,yeah right.

…Mother of pearl,you're a
paladin!!



I'm the prettiest girl in
town!

Everyone in Mythril wants
to marry my daughter…
-sigh-







D

Stock up on basic medicine
before going out.
It's rough out there.









































Howdy! Where ya from?

Lali-ho?
No,it's howdy here!

In the volcano's lava,
there's a bunch of stuff…
or so I hear.

Ya came from the
Overworld? So it's real?!

Know what? The cave on the
northwest isle leads to
the Feymarch.

I heard the Overworld's
ocean is blue…yuck.

This is the home of the
world's greatest
blacksmith,Kokkol.

Boss lost his confidence,
lali…

Lali-ho!
Boss looks so happy!

I'll become a great
blacksmith,too,lali!

Come back later!

It's done!
This is the Sacred Sword.
Go on,take it!
($09)Received [Sword]Excalibur![Song][Claw]($05)[Float]

Thank you for all your
help.
($09)($09)Check back with me later.
I'll be forging something
new every now and then.

Lali-ho!
Welcome to Kokkol's!

I'm not going to make
another sword until I find
the legendary ore,
[Stone]Adamant.

This…is [Stone]Adamant!
($09)($09)($09)As token of my gratitude,
I'll forge your old sword
into a greater one!

Lost [Sword]Legend.

Zzz…

The Sylph Cave is to the
far northwest.

The sylphs are afraid of
us,but we just wanna be
friends.

Dang,a customer!

Edge:Look out!

Look out!

Received [Katana]Kazekiri!

Received [Rod]Magus Rod!

Received [Bow]Artemis Bow!

Lali-ho!

The Dwarven Castle is
ruled by King Giott,lali!

Golbez is a wicked human,
but you seem different.

Lali-ho! Meet King Giott!

All clear!

This side's clear,too!

Golbez is gone.

Are there many like Golbez
on the Overworld?

Lali-ho is our greeting.

Together now!
($09)($09)($09)Lali-ho!

Lali-ho!
I'm happy you're OK!

King Giott awaits.

We're the nurses.

When the hole to the
Overworld closed,we
found a strange old man.
He's in the infirmary.

Hi,I'm Luca.I'm looking
for my dolls.Have you seen
any Calbrina?

Tanks are our main force.
They won't give up easy,
lali!

His Majesty has doted on
Princess Luca since the
queen passed…

Do you know lali-ho?

How do you like it here?
Stay as long as you like.

D

Rydia:Isn't it their
stronghold? It must be
well-armed.
($09)Yang:But now is the only
chance we have.

Cecil:We'll do it.

Giott:Good.
There's a path to the
other side of the plateau
in the castle basement.
Go when you're ready,and
good luck.

Luca:How dare they use
my dolls for bad things!

Giott:We'll counter the
enemy's main forces.You
go to the Seaed Cave to
the southwest.

Giott:Go to Mysidia.
You hold the future of
us all!

Luca:Take care of that
necklace,please!
It's a keepsake of my
mother.

Due to the magma,we can't
get to Tomra,east of the
Sealed Cave.

You'll need to fly to get
to the Sealed Cave,so
we're counting on you.

You'd need to cast
[White]Float to survive the
Passage of the Espers.

I bet the airship man
could make your new ship
fly over magma.

Luca:Promise you'll come
back!

Wark! After a dragoon
Leaps,he can strategically
Land on any turn![Song][Knife]

Fat Chocobo?! Heresy!
This is the Sacred Bird!

Sacred Birds are wise.
Listen to them!

Go ahead,lali!

Lali-ho!

Take care,lali!

The Tower of Babil has a
weapon called the Super
Cannon.

Underworld monsters are
strong! Be careful,lali.





Dwarf equipment is heavy!
Dwarf items are unique!
Can you use them?!

Human bodies have vigor!
Human brains can adapt!
Would you buy some gear?!

Let's get funky,lali!

Lali-lali-ho!

I'm pretty brave.
But you're braver!

Come back alive,lali!

Do not overestimate your
powers! Don't be afraid to
run.

Golbez may have left the
tower,but Rubicant of
Fire,strongest of the Four
Fiends,is still there.

Our tanks will draw their
attacks so you can sneak
in,lali.

This is a Pot of Life,
lali! Want a sip?



D

Authorized dwarves only!

This is the infirmary.

Dwarves are tough,but we
get hurt,too.

What a youthful old man!

He says the food's bad,but
sure eats a ton…

I need to get well,quick!

Zzz…

He shouldn't have done
that…

He's the nicest weirdo
I've ever met,lali.

Zzz…

I still can't get over how
he put on the drill,lali!

People of the Overworld
aren't that bad.

Cid:Treat the airship
like ya'd treat me,OK?













Fusoya:Now is the time.

Fusoya:The situation is
dire.Zeromus must be dealt
with.

Fusoya:Cecil,take this…
and stop Zeromus.



Take the treasure.It'll
prove useful in the war
against Golbez.

King Giott permits you to
take what you want.











($09)     …INTRUDER ALERT…
($09)($09)    …ATTACK PROTOCOL…
       …INITIATED…

Yang:Close call…

Edge:I'll get that
chest…

Edge:Another day,
another loot!





It won't budge.





Dr.Lugae:Lord Rubicant,
please be careful.
Rubicant:The threat of the
ninja has been dealt with.
Take care of this place
while I'm away.

Dr.Lugae:Hee-hee-hee!
With Rubicant and Golbez
gone,I'm free to
experiment again!!
Rydia:What a weirdo…

Dr.Lugae:Who's there?!

Kain:Won't you call for
help,doctor?

Dr.Lugae:Don't take me
lightly!!
Kain:Don't make me
laugh!

Dr.Lugae:Face my beloved
son,Barnab!

Rydia:The dwarves are in
danger!

Yang:We must stop the
Super Cannon.

Kain:Let's destroy it.

Dr.Lugae:I'll best you
yet,you curs!

Rosa:Shh!

Dr.Lugae:Cecil!

Warp device out of power.

Rydia learned…
[Black]Toad! [Black]Pig!
[Black]Psych! [Black]Drain!
($09)Received [Key]Lugae Key!



Received [Axe]Rune Axe!

Leave me alone…

Why do you bother me?
I'll CRUSH you!!

En garde!

Gilgamesh:Care to spar?

…Hey,yer not lookin' so
hot,either.Here…
take this [Potion]All-Potion!

So long,dwarves!

Cecil:This ends now!

Blast! The enemy!
Get them!

Hah…well then…!

No one can stop the Super
Cannon now!

Kain:What…?!

Cecil:Yang!
Rosa:What are you
doing?!

Yang:I'll take care of
this! You escape!
Rydia:No! Don't!
Cecil:It'll explode!
Yang:GO!!



Kain:…I must also make
Zemus pay.

Cecil:Please,Cid!

Yang!!

Rosa:No!

Cecil:Ready?

We did it!

Kain:Rosa!

Rydia:Oh no…
Edge:Blast it!!

Edge:I see!
So we destroy its core!

Edge:So long,Rydia…

Cecil:Let's go,
Kain,Edge!

Kain:If that happens
again,please…kill me.

Cecil:We'll head for…
…the Moon!





Received…
[White]Elf Cloak!
[White]Ethereal Mantle!

Elder:This is fate in
action.Return to the
Moon!

Sheila:Give Zemus a good
whack!

Joanna:Look after
yourselves,and save us
all.

Giott:You hold the future
of this world's sacred
life.

Elder:Cecil,I must see
Palom and Porom before
you leave.Would you bring
them to me?

Hilda:Please take care of
Dad,and rip Zemus apart!

Sheila:Oh,almost forgot…
Take this,and give Zemus
a good whack with it for
me!

Received [Knife]Spoon!

Please look after Chief!

You are in our thoughts.

D

Luca:Come back soon and
see us in the Underworld!

Received…
[Rod]Lilith Rod!
[Staff]Aura Staff!













Rydia,you're back!

You're the only humans to
visit other than Rydia.

This is the Feymarch.
We're called to your realm
from here.

Our king resides in the
heart of our world.



Hi Rydia!

This world is ruled by the
King of Espers and Queen
Asura.

I heard in the other
plane,our friends aren't
behaving themselves.

You have to best Queen
Asura to be able to even
speak to the king.

Rydia! 'Sup!
…What,ain't ya ever seen
a talking chocobo before?

This is the library.Feel
free to peruse our lore.

Rydia!
Glad to see you back!

Rydia,are these your
human friends?

Rydia! Don't go again!

Shh…quiet.

What a great book…

Titan,the Colossus,
can sunder the earth
to swallow his foes.

Ifrit,the Burning,causes
all he touches to
immolate.

The origin of the Art of
Calling remains shrouded
in mystery.

Ramuh,the Wise,is slow to
anger,but his wrath
strikes down in terrible
lightning.

Those who cross Shiva,the
Ice Queen,will freeze to
the bone.


Chocobo,the Swift,is quick
on its feet and cuter than
all other Espers.

Few humans remain who are
able to harness the Art of
Calling.

Our land's history traces
to the time before men.

One must be strong in body
and mind to pass the cave
to the human realm.

Is there literature in the
human world?

Ours is a library of
limitless knowledge.

Callers are mages with the
power to summon Espers.

Espers,men,monsters…
Where are these souls 
born? To where do they
return? An ageless enigma…

Long ago,a great whale
descended from the Moon.
It now slumbers within a
dragon's mouth.

The Father of Espers
created us.He watches over
us from the heavens.
($09)There are no records of
his power being overcome.

Only one Moon shone upon
primeval Earth,but now two
exist.

Queen Asura is the gateway
to the King's audience.
Those who best her will
see his true form.

Our king is referred to by
humans as Lord of the Sea.

Odin of the Atom Edge was
only defeated when
lightning struck his
blade.

Sylphs,the Gentle and
Frail,can unite to absorb
life essence and gift it
to others.

True strength lies in a
kind heart.Callers must be
tried before you may
impart your aid.
This is Esper Law.

This is the royal chamber.

You need Queen Asura's
permission to address the
King.

Asura:Rydia…
You have fine,brave
friends.Call me whenever
needed.

Leviathan:You surely bear
the Power of Light.
I,King of Espers,shall
assist you.

I'm just an old man…

Then prepare yourselves.

Anytime you change your
minds.

I'll be here if you wish
to challenge me.

Can you use our weapons?

Hey,Rydia!

I don't like humans
walking around like this,
Rydia.

We want to live in peace.



Chocobo,Shiva,Ramuh…
They all live here in the
Feymarch.

How's that hot-head Ifrit
doing?

If you have [White]Float,Titan's
a pussycat. 









Received [Potion]All-Potion! 

…

Eek! Humans!

Don't worry,Yang is in
our care.

What are you doing here?

Don't take Yang!

D

Humans are so violent…

He collapsed in front of
our cave and has been
unconscious since.
($09)We've done all we can…
What else can wake him?

Yang needs rest.

Yang:Mmm…
($09)($09)($09)Already time for
training? Let me sleep
a bit longer…

D

Yang:The whole world is
in danger.I can't -
Edge:It's no place for
the injured,man!

D

Miss Caller,summon us
anytime!
Rydia:Thank you!
($09)Rydia learned [Call]Sylph![Song][Claw]($05)[Float]

Sylph:Oh! Don't -

D

We miss Yang…

Say hello to Yang for
us.

How's Yang?

Yang:I cannot be of aid…
I'm sorry.



…

Commencing New Game+. 

En garde!

Received…
($09)($09)($09)[Shield]Celestial Shield!
[Sword]Apocalypse!
[Sword]Ultima II!
[Stone]Dark Matter!





D

D

Ouch!



A strange crystalline
formation…

The formation began to
grow violently!

    Blade of the Void
      - [Katana]Eclipse -
        Unveiled!







Received [Greatsword]Defender!





Rydia learned [Black]Death!

Low-intelligence life
forms detected.

…







Who are you?

Oh…you're half-human and
half…!

You're the first the
Father accepted.

A great burden rests on
your shoulders.

Return when you've visted
the Feymarch.

I have witnessed the light
of your will.
Call my name in your
need,Rydia.

Rydia learned [Call]Bahamut![Song][Claw]($05)[Float]

You're…from the
Blue Planet…
($09)($09)…and weak.



Cecil:A book…I can't
decipher its text.It must
be written in an ancient
Lunarian script.
I wonder who can translate
this…?
($09)($09)Received [Stone]Lunar Tome![Song][Claw]($05)[Float]

Welcome!

You must first prove
yourself a hero.

The Giant of Babil was
destroyed.Zemus' barrier
has been destroyed.
The path is open.

This Moon is maintained by
the balance of the eight
Crystals of the Blue
Planet.

The Lunarians sleep within
the Lunar Core.
Fusoya is their guardian.

Zemus has become a terror.
His mind does not sleep,
even when his body is
sealed deep below.

We keep Zemus confined.

Zemus used Golbez to
gather the Crystals and
enhance their powers in
the Tower of Babil.

Zemus made a barrier from
within to obstruct the
path to the core.

From the center of this
room,there runs a path
that leads to Zemus,but
it is shielded.

We are the Moon Crystals.

Below are Sealed Weapons
forged by Lunarian hand,in
hopes that Zemus would be
defeated with them.

KluYa's son and Fusoya
went inside.
They have yet to return.

Our combined powers are
able to neutralize Zemus'
influence.

Between the powers of
light and darkness,we are
able to create an enormous
energy.

Even Fusoya will have face
difficulty against Zemus'
psychic powers.

At last…the fated hour
has come,and the final
battle is nigh.

We shall guide you to the
path leading to the core -
the Lunar Subterrane.







We Hummingways are a
well-traveled people.

Hummm-hum…!

We're the Hummingways.

One of us was great at
nicknames,but he went to
the Blue Planet long ago.



Received several attack
items!



















At the Crescent's Horn
lies a hidden path to the
Sword of Power.

Edge:Let's end this!

Kain:Zemus must pay.
Let's go!

Cecil:For everyone,
let's end this!

($09)        THE END…?

Zeromus' hatred runs deep…

Fusoya:Oh,you're here!

Cecil!

Cecil…

Right on!

Fusoya:Begone!

Fusoya:Well done!

Golbez:…Thank you.

Incredible!
($09)($09)($09)Golbez:Cecil…

Golbez:…And take…this…

Exactly.

Oh,you're right…

Cecil:Golbez!

To descend this stair is
to approach the eternal
master,and forfeit your
return to the Lunar Core.

?

H-Huh?!













Deep within the core lies
the AI.It is immune to
all elements.

Received…
[Armor]Grand Armor!
[Stone]Dark Matter!

Received [Spear]Holy![Song][Claw]($05)[Float]